Rewrite of the zoning guide (#366)
momentum-mod/docs: content/docs/guide/map_submission/map_zoning.md

- Regions of zones should **never** overlap
    - Regions should also not touch if it's possible to connect them into a single zone
- All points should **always** be snapped to map geometry whenever possible.
- Checkpoints should be placed in a way that provides the **most consistant** time comparison.
    - Place checkpoint in the middle/end of hallways rather than right after a turn
    - Place checkpoints at the bottom of drops rather than at the top 

![Checkpoint Placement Suggestions](/images/map_porting/zoning_checkpoint_placement2.png)

# Setup
1. Open console (**~** by default, key below ESC)
2. Type `sv_cheats 1`
3. Press **Tab** to open leaderboards
4. Right click to get mouse control and click the button in **bottom left**
    - You also open this menu with `mom_zoning_enable 1` in console

{{<hint info>}}

All zones will save to **/momentum/maps/zones/local**.  
You can access it by **Right Clicking** Momentum Mod in your steam library and selecting **Manage → Browse local files**

{{</hint>}}

![Open Zoning Menu](/images/map_zoning/editor_tab.png)

# Basic information
Zoning menu is split into 4 sections
### Left section

> This section is for creating the **main track** and **bonuses**.  

Reviewer: This should also mention global regions.

Every **track** can have **stages**
### Middle section
This section is for creating **stages** ( called **courses** in RJ/SJ ).  
Every **stage** measures time for **comparisons** and has it's own **leaderboard**!  
Every **stage** can have it's own **checkpoints**.

{{<hint info>}}

In the zoning menu **stages** are called **segments**.  

> That is because of difference in uses between gamemodes.

Reviewer: This is vague. Mention that "courses" are used for RJ/SJ.

---

# Introduction
Zones allow players to measure and submit times to the leaderboards.  
This guide focuses on zoning using Momentum Mod's **in-game tool**.   
Zoning using **Hammer** is briefly covered in [this section](#hammer-zoning)

# General Guidelines

> - Zones should **always** use teleport destinations **defined by the mapper** when possible.

Reviewer 2: Zones with teleport destinations should **always** use entities **defined by the mapper** when possible.

Every **track** can have **stages**
{{<hint info>}}

[Global Regions](#global-regions) always affect the player, no matter what track they are playing on.

{{</hint>}}
### Middle section
This section is for creating **stages** ( called **courses** in RJ/SJ ).  
Every **stage** measures time for **comparisons** and has it's own **leaderboard**!  
Every **stage** can have it's own **checkpoints**.

{{<hint info>}}

In the zoning menu **stages** are called **segments**.  
That is because of difference in uses between gamemodes.

{{</hint>}}

### Right section
This section is for creating **checkpoints**.  
**Checkpoints** measure time for **comparisons** but **don't have leaderboards**.

### Bottom section
This section lists additional properties of zones.  
They are covered [later in the guide](#setting-zone-properties).

![Zoning Menu Showcase](/images/map_zoning/zoning_menu_showcase.png)

# Basic Zoning

## Creating the Start Zone
Every **stage** needs a start zone. 
1. Noclip to the start of the map
    - **g** by default or `noclip` in console 
1. Click **+ Main**
    - You can right click to **toggle mouse control** while the **zoning menu** is open

>     - This will automatically create the **main track**, **stage 1** and put you in the **zoning mode**

Author: I moved the toggle mouse control hint below the setup, seems like a better place for it

---

# Introduction
Zones allow players to measure and submit times to the leaderboards.  
This guide focuses on zoning using Momentum Mod's **in-game tool**.   
Zoning using **Hammer** is briefly covered in [this section](#hammer-zoning)

> # General Guidelines

Reviewer 3: Thanks, good catch
<img width="1024" height="361" alt="2" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e9885168-863f-4f3e-a3bf-dbafd4aadbbb" />

I finally got around to trying AI programming stuff this week so I made a little script to make these that way.

- Regions of zones should **never** overlap
    - Regions should also not touch if it's possible to connect them into a single zone
- All points should **always** be snapped to map geometry whenever possible.
- **Checkpoints** should be placed in a way that provides the **most consistant** time comparison
    - Place checkpoint in the middle/end of hallways rather than right after a turn
    - Place checkpoints at the bottom of drops rather than at the top 
- **Checkpoints** in modes other than **RJ, SJ, and Conc** should generally be at least 10s apart
    - This does not have to be very precise, it's fine to place checkpoints at longer intervals if that fits the gameplay better.
    - You can watch WR videos and place checkpoints in approximate spots

### Zone Height
- If the zone is **right under a ceiling**, it should extend **all the way up** to it
- If there is **no ceiling above**, the zone should be **at least 256u** tall
    - Zones can be taller than that if it fits the geometry of the map better
- **Start zone's height** should be set based on **gameplay and timing needs**
    - Unless there is a reason, it should also follow the guidelines above

> - **End zones** that the player has to **fall into** can be as short as **1u**

Author: I agree, and it was one of my main issues after writing the guide. After looking at it again I think I managed to move a lot of this to appropriate sections.
I left the checkpoint placement and zoning height in general guidelines though, they seem to be short enough and I couldn't really fit them nicely anywhere else. Maybe checkpoint placement could be somewhere in "creating checkpoints" section but the image is really big and breaks up the text too much if placed it's not placed at the end of a section. Could maybe hide it in an expander box but that seems like a janky solution and Id like people to at least glance at it when scrolling through

![Checkpoint Placement Suggestions](/images/map_porting/zoning_checkpoint_placement2.png)

# Setup
1. Open console (**~** by default, key below ESC)
2. Type `sv_cheats 1`
3. Press **Tab** to open leaderboards
4. Right click to get mouse control and click the button in **bottom left**
    - You also open this menu with `mom_zoning_enable 1` in console

{{<hint info>}}
You can **right click** to **toggle mouse control** while the **zoning menu** is open
{{</hint>}}

{{<hint info>}}

All zones will be saved to **/momentum/maps/zones/local** folder.  
You can access it by **Right Clicking** Momentum Mod in your steam library and selecting **Manage → Browse local files**

{{</hint>}}

![Open Zoning Menu](/images/map_zoning/editor_tab.png)

# Basic information
Zoning menu is split into 4 sections
### Left section
This section is for creating the **main track**, **bonuses**, and **global regions**.  
Every **track** can have **stages**
{{<hint info>}}

[Global Regions](#global-regions) always affect the player, no matter what track they are playing on.

{{</hint>}}
### Middle section

> This section is for creating **stages** ( called **courses** in RJ/SJ ).  

Reviewer 3: Also the end zone

    - If the platform you're zoning is not rectangular see the [Freeform Mode](#freeform-mode) section
4. Choose the height of your zone ( please follow the [zone height requirements](#zone-height))
    - Make sure the **destination entity** is inside of your zone
    - The entity will turn green when encompassed by the region
    - The entity is usually above any starting platform ( grey box in the video below )
5. If necessary, change the [Safe Height](#safe-height) of your zone

{{<hint info>}}

Zoning non-rectangular platforms: [Freeform Mode](#freeform-mode).  
Zoning in mid-air: [Box Mode](#box-mode).

{{</hint>}}

{{<hint info>}}

You can always [Edit Zones](#zone-editing) after creating them.

{{</hint>}}

{{<video src="/videos/map_zoning/create_start_zone.mp4">}}

## Creating Stages and Checkpoints
**Stages** and **Checkpoints** are used differently depending on the gamemode.  
Please follow the guide appropriate for your map.  

{{<hint info>}}

Checkpoints should be placed where they can be hit consistently for better split comparisons.  
Middle/End of a hallway is generally preferred  over placing them right at the start. 

{{</hint>}}

{{<hint info>}}

> When zoning **multiple routes** or **around a hole in geometry** you should be adding [Additional Regions](#multiple-regions) to a single zone.

Reviewer 3: I would add to the end: "instead of creating extra zones". Especially since in other zoning systems people are used to, you create extra zones with the same number to do this.

{{</hint>}}

{{<hint warning>}}

On all **Surf** maps, make sure to create [Allow Bhop](#allow-bhop) zones where necessary.

{{</hint>}}

- [Surf: Linear](/guide/map_submission/map_zoning/#surf-linear)
- [Surf: Staged](/guide/map_submission/map_zoning/#surf-staged)
- [Surf: Staged-Linear](/guide/map_submission/map_zoning/#surf-staged-linear)
- [Rocket / Sticky Jump: No Courses](/guide/map_submission/map_zoning/#rocket--sticky-jump-no-courses)
- [Rocket / Sticky Jump: With Courses](/guide/map_submission/map_zoning/#rocket--sticky-jump-with-courses)
- [Other Gamemodes](/guide/map_submission/map_zoning/#other-gamemodes)

### Surf: Linear

> Linear Surf maps should have **1 stage** and **checkpoints** placed throughout the map for **comparisons**.  

Author: I changed all mentions of "stages" in places  like this to "segments". Now with glossary it should be clear what they are

**Example: surf_atonement zones**
![Linear Surf Zones](/images/map_zoning/zoning_surf_linear.png)

### Surf: Staged
Staged Surf maps should have a seperate **stage zone** ( called **segment** in the zoning menu ) for every **stage**.  

> Those **stage zones** can have **checkpoints** for better comparisons ( usually only used for **really long** stages ).  

Reviewer 3: This sounds like this is calling an entire stage/segment a "stage zone", but a zone is just a volume in one specific spot of a map. Not sure if that's what you meant, but I think calling a segment/subsegment a "zone" is actually something some people/communities do, so it would be good to clearly differentiate from that.

"Staged Surf maps should have a Segment for every stage. Segments for very long stages can have additional Checkpoints added within them for extra timer splits for comparing runs."

If you have any questions please ask in **#map-porting** channel on our [Discord](https://discord.gg/momentummod).

{{</hint>}}

1. Uncheck **End segment at next segment start** in **main track** properties
    - This will make the time submit when the player enters **last checkpoint** on a **course** except for the **last course**
    - **Last course** time will **always** submit when player enters the [End Zone](/guide/map_submission/map_zoning/#creating-the-end-zone)
![RJ/SJ Courses Properties](/images/map_zoning/zoning_rocket_sticky_jump_courses_properties.png)
2. For every **course except last**:
    1. Create a **new segment** at the first jump
    2. Add a **checkpoint** to the start of every jump
    3. Add a **checkpoint** to the end platform ( before being teleported to the hub )
3. For the **last course**:
    1. Create a **new segment** at the first jump
    2. Add a **checkpoint** to the start of every jump
        - **Do not** add a checkpoint to the end of this course

**Example: rj_deserted zones** ( notice that the end of **course 1** is zoned with a **checkpoint** )
![RJ/SJ Courses](/images/map_zoning/zoning_rocket_sticky_jump_courses.png)

### Other Gamemodes

> Vast majority of maps for gamemodes other than **Surf** and **Rocket / Sticky Jump** will use a **single stage** with **checkpoints**.  

Reviewer 3: Similarly, I would say "single segment" instead of "single stage".

That means they should be zoned identically to [Surf: Linear](/guide/map_submission/map_zoning/#surf-linear) maps.  

{{<hint info >}}

The only difference is that for modes other than Surf the **Limit ground speed** checkbox will be automatically **unchecked**.  

> That is the correct behavior so you don't have to worry about it.

Reviewer 3: This setting really only applies to segments after the first, so I don't think it needs to be mentioned here.

{{</hint>}} 

{{<hint warning>}}

> When zoning **Defrag** maps, also make sure to make checkpoints [not required](#required-checkpoints)

Reviewer 3: I think this is more of a legacy thing rather than a fundamental part of Defrag. If a ported Defrag map (with included checkpoints) has checkpoints which are naturally skippable, they shouldn't be required. But if creating zones from scratch, ideally they should still be done in a way that they aren't skippable.

Reviewer 3: My point is basically that whether checkpoints should be flagged as required is a map consideration, not a game mode consideration. There is of course a correlation between a game mode and how the maps are designed, but someone shouldn't be going "this is a defrag map, the checkpoints *must* be optional". If the mapper meant for checkpoints to be in certain places and to be required so that they regulate what players are required to do, of course those should be required. For maps where the mapper did not have any particular checkpoints in mind and there isn't an existing standard for the map, checkpoints should always be placed in ways that they cannot be skipped if it is possible to do so while covering the map adequately. Whoever is deciding the checkpoint locations in that case should be putting a little thought into it and not just slapping some in and not caring if they get skipped.

Reviewer 3: If you're thinking about cases where maps are very open and there are no true choke points for checkpoints, that's one thing, but I'm talking about encouraging people to at least *try* to be smart about it by choosing a choke point if there *is* one and it's a good option, versus putting a checkpoint in a nearby area but one that can be skipped.

> I don't think a mapper or even playtesters can catch all the skips

For sure, but there *are* cases where there is an option for a checkpoint position that is clearly impossible to skip (short of a player breaking the game completely and phasing through walls).

If the guide says something more along the lines of optional checkpoints being the default, that's fine. The original guidance was to "make *sure* they are not required", which makes using them for required collectibles and things like that completely impossible.

{{</hint>}}

{{<hint warning>}}

Of course there are exceptions to this rule.  
There is nothing stopping maps for other gamemodes to be staged.  
The reason they are not is simply because of the way different communities create maps.  
Some exceptions are:
- **bhop_sqee** ( Multiple long courses. Every course is a seperate stage because they are fun to compete on individually )
- **df_parkourushi** ( Long parkour courses. In defrag due to technical limitations every course was made to be a seperate map. In Momentum Mod they can be stages )   

In case you encounter these exceptions, apply your best judgement to which method of zoning from above to use.  

> When in doubt, don't hesitate to ask for help in **#map-porting** channel on our [Discord](https://discord.gg/momentummod).

Reviewer 3: I'm not familiar with Defrag maps, but I think for bhop at least the exceptions that work are so rare (if we even want to allow them) that this is not worth mentioning and it will only lead to people submitting things with stages that definitely shouldn't have them.

{{</hint>}}

**Example: surf_technique zones**
![Creating Bonues](/images/map_zoning/zoning_bonuses.png)

## Creating Cancel Zones
In order for players to switch tracks by walking into another start zone ( such as walking from **Main Track** to a **Bonus** ), they need to stop their timer first.  
**Cancel zones** stop the timer automatically when they are entered.  
They can either be **global** or **per segment**.  
**Example: surf_bugs zones** ( a **cancel zone** is stopping player's timer before walking into bonuses )
![Cancel Zones Example](/images/map_zoning/zoning_cancel_zone_example.png)

# Setting Zone Properties
## Max Velocity
By default the **Max Velocity** is limited to **3500** for most gamemodes.  
Some **Surf** and **Bhop** maps are designed for higher speeds.  
You can set the **Max Velocity** in **Main Track** properties. 

{{<hint warning>}}

**Max Velocity** always applies to the **entire map**, not only the Main Track.

{{</hint>}}

{{<hint danger>}}

You **have to** press **Enter** after inputting **Max Velocity**, otherwise it won't save.

{{</hint>}}

![Max Velocity](/images/map_zoning/zoning_max_velocity.png)

## Safe Height

> Player needs to stand **at or below** the safe height to be able to start the run.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The player needs to stand **at or below** the safe height to be able to prime the timer before starting.  
```

This setting is generally only relevant to **Surf** and **Bhop**, other modes use **Full Height** by default.  
{{<hint warning>}}

Make sure that safe height encompasses any **small protrusions** in the **start zones**.  
Pay special attention to **zone markings** on **Bhop maps** as those are often solid and require **raising the safe height by 2-3 units**.

{{</hint>}}

![Safe Height Property](/images/map_zoning/zoning_safeheight_properties.png)
![Safe Height Property](/images/map_zoning/zoning_safeheight_example.png)

## Required Checkpoints
Uncheck **Checkpoints Required** in **Segment** properties to allow players to submit times without hitting every checkpoint.

{{<hint info>}}

Some maps might include **large skips** that will make the player not hit every checkpoint.  
Additionally most **Defrag** maps don't require checkpoints to be hit.  

> {{</hint>}}

Reviewer 3: Checkpoints should almost always be required, and people should be thoughtful in how they place them to make this work instead of immediately falling back on making them not required. Checkpoints that fast players are likely to skip are kind of useless, so it's better to compromise a bit on positioning if it means they are no longer skippable. So I think this should say something like:

"Checkpoints are most valuable when it is impossible to skip them, so always try your best to position them in places that cannot be skipped.

In rare cases, there could be a very long section of a track with no unskippable areas. If a Checkpoint is still desired here, Checkpoints in a Segment can be made optional by unchecking **Checkpoints Required**."

---

There could still be a mention of Defrag, though as I said above I think it's more about supporting established checkpoints in legacy maps than a fundamental part of Defrag.

And really I think that's what support for non-required checkpoints was *actually* added for, and in other cases there's probably always a reasonable way to make them required!

Reviewer 3: Yeah not totally sure on that wording either. Basically saying if the *only* way to have unskippable checkpoints is to have a really long gap between them, that's probably the case where optional checkpoints are ok so you don't have too long of a stretch with no checkpoints at all. It's really about expressing our preference for "move the positions around a bit to make it work without issues with skips if you can", instead of "make everything perfectly evenly spaced even if they are skippable, because requiring checkpoints only matters if it's part of the map's design (e.g. checkpoints-as-collectibles)"

Click **Middle Mouse Button** while zoning to switch between modes.  
You can [Edit the zone](#zone-editing) after placing it.
![Box Mode](/images/map_zoning/zoning_box_mode.png)

## Multiple Regions
Every zone can have multiple, disconnected regions.  
This can be used to zone multiple **routes**, **starting points**, **ends**, or to create **holes in zone geometry**.  
Click the **+** button in zone properties to add a region.  
![Multiple Regions](/images/map_zoning/zoning_multiple_regions.png)

## Defrag Modifier Bonuses
Bonuses in **Defrag** require a different approach than in other modes.  
They use the same **Start and End Zones** as the **Main Track**, but apply **modifiers** to the player.  
Clicking on **+Defrag Modifier Bonus** will create the bonus and allow for editing specific **modifiers**.
![Defrag Modifier Bonuses](/images/map_zoning/zoning_defrag_modifier_bonus.png)

## Zone Editing
Any zone can be edited after it's creation.  
Simply click the **Edit Points** button and choose the point you want to edit.  
- Corners - Allow you to edit the XY position of an individual vertex
- Edges - Allow you to create additional vertices

> - Sides - Allow you to move a side along it's axis

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Sides - Allow you to move a side along it's axis. The zone must be a rectangle to use this option.
```

Author: Added it as a sub-point

- Regions of zones should **never** overlap
    - Regions should also not touch if it's possible to connect them into a single zone
- All points should **always** be snapped to map geometry whenever possible.
- **Checkpoints** should be placed in a way that provides the **most consistant** time comparison
    - Place checkpoint in the middle/end of hallways rather than right after a turn
    - Place checkpoints at the bottom of drops rather than at the top 
- **Checkpoints** in modes other than **RJ, SJ, and Conc** should generally be about 10s apart

>     - This does not have to be very precise, you can watch WR videos and place checkpoints in approximate spots

Reviewer 4: Sure, the main thing I was meaning is to not have people get the impression that they should be placing checkpoints about every 10 seconds. Just that it is about the **minimum** interval. I think it could lead to people spamming CPs unnecessarily

>     - This does not have to be very precise, you can watch WR videos and place checkpoints in approximate spots

Author: The sentence I added should make that clear, but I can change wording of the main point too if you'd prefer that
